Foundations of Reinforcement Learning with Applications in Finance
Ashwin Rao, Tikhon Jelvis
Order-Book Trading Algorithms
In this chapter, we venture into the world of Algorithmic Trading and specifically, we cover a couple of problems involving a trading Order Book that can be cast as Markov Decision Processes, and hence tackled with Dynamic Programming or Reinforcement Learning. We start the chapter by covering the basics of how trade orders are submitted and executed on an Order Book, a structure that allows for eﬀicient transactions between buyers and sellers of a financial asset. Without loss of generality, we refer to the financial asset being traded on the Order Book as a “stock” and the number of units of the asset as “shares.” Next we will explain how a large trade can significantly shift the Order Book, a phenomenon known as Price Impact. Finally, we will cover the two algorithmic trading problems that can be cast as MDPs. The first problem is Optimal Execution of the sale of a large number of shares of a stock so as to yield the maximum utility of sales proceeds over a finite horizon. This involves breaking up the sale of the shares into appropriate pieces and selling those pieces at the right times so as to achieve the goal of maximizing the utility of sales proceeds. Hence, it is an MDP Control problem where the actions are the number of shares sold at each time step. The second problem is Optimal Market-Making, i.e., the optimal bids (willingness to buy a certain number of shares at a certain price) and asks (willingness to sell a certain number of shares at a certain price) to be submitted on the Order Book. Again, by optimal, we mean maximization of the utility of revenues generated by the market-maker over a finite-horizon (market-makers generate revenue through the spread, i.e. the gap between the bid and ask prices they offer). This is also an MDP Control problem where the actions are the bid and ask prices along with the bid and ask shares at each time step.